SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic
Tutoring and Practice
Tianfu Wang
HKUST (GZ)
Guangzhou, China
twang566@connect.hkust-
gz.edu.cn
Max Xiong
Duke University
Durham, United States
mx71@duke.edu
Yuxuan Lei
Microsoft
Beijing, China
t-
yuxuanlei@microsoft.com
Jianxun Lian
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
jianxun.lian@outlook.com
Hongyuan Zhu
Microsoft
Beijing, China
hongyuanzhu@microsoft.com
Zhengyu Hu
HKUST (GZ)
Guangzhou, China
v-
huzhengyu@microsoft.com
Linxiao Gong
HKUST (GZ)
Guangzhou, China
Igong265@connect.hkust-
gz.edu.cn
Dapeng Hu
Microsoft
Beijing, China
dapenghu@microsoft.com
Xiaofang Li
Microsoft
Beijing, China
xiaofangli@microsoft.com
Peiting Tsai
Microsoft
Beijing, China
peitingtsai@microsoft.com
Nicholas Jing Yuan
Microsoft
Beijing, China
nicholas.yuan@microsoft.com
Qi Zhang
Microsoft
Beijing, China
zhang.qi@microsoft.com
Abstract
Social skills such as negotiation and leadership are crucial for per-
sonal and professional success in today’s interconnected world.
However, scalable and effective training remains a significant chal-
lenge due to the scarcity of expert coaching. In this work, we in-
troduce SocialCoach, an LLM-powered agentic tutoring system for
personalized social skill learning. SocialCoach constructs a theory-
to-practice corpus of traceable strategies, cases, and practice scenar-
ios, and uses this corpus for both scheduling and reflective tutoring.
We formulate social practice personalization as cold-start, retrieval-
constrained sequential practice scheduling. Given a learner profile,
simulated proficiency state, and observed practice history, a policy
produces structured prescriptions that are realized through cor-
pus retrieval. To enhance scheduling effectiveness, we optimize
complete pathways with trajectory-level GRPO using rubric-judge-
based pairwise preferences. Additionally, we instantiate the sched-
uling approach in a deployed platform with goal-driven practice
and knowledge-grounded reflective tutoring. Finally, in the syn-
thetic cold-start setting, experiment results show that SocialCoach
achieves higher pathway-quality ratings than baselines in schedul-
ing and tutoring quality. We also conduct human studies to demon-
strate its usefulness for real-world social skill learning.
CCS Concepts
• Information systems →Data mining; • Social and profes-
sional topics →Computing education.
Keywords
Social Skill Learning, AI for Education, LLM Agent, Personalization
Conflict 
Resolution
Emotional 
Regulation
Persuasion & 
Negotiation
Leadership 
Building
Scalability
Personalization
Immersion
Mastery
(a) Representative Social Skills
(b) Expert Coaching Loop
Diverse Practical Requirements
Material
Preparation
Curriculum
Design
Simulated
Practice
Knowledge
Tutoring
Figure 1: The social skills training landscape. (a) Examples
of critical social skills. (b) The typical expert coaching loop,
highlighting diverse practical requirements.
1
Introduction
In this increasingly interconnected and collaborative global land-
scape, proficiency in complex social skills is critical for both per-
sonal well-being and professional success. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 1(a), social skills, such as negotiation, leadership, and conflict
resolution, profoundly shape an individual’s ability to navigate
interpersonal environments [6]. These competencies not only un-
derpin effective interpersonal relationships but also serve as sig-
nificant drivers of economic value. Yet, despite their undeniable
importance, the effective acquisition of these skills remains a criti-
cal gap for most learners worldwide. Traditionally, expert coaching
is a proven pathway for social skill development. As illustrated
in Figure 1(b), this educational loop consists of several key stages,
including the knowledge preparation for specialized skills, tailored
curriculum design, scenario simulation for practice and providing
arXiv:2606.04155v2  [cs.HC]  16 Aug 2026

Tianfu Wang et al.
constructive guidance. However, effectively orchestrating these
stages requires substantial human expertise and resources, which
limits the scalability and accessibility of high-quality coaching [29].
The advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) presents a transfor-
mative opportunity to address these limitations. However, early
AI-driven methods often selectively focus on isolated educational
tasks such as social dialogue generation or knowledge tutoring, and
have limited generalizability over various topics. Large Language
Models (LLMs) have demonstrated a remarkable capacity for both
vast knowledge integration and context-aware dialogue generation.
This is crucial to distinguish their application in declarative knowl-
edge acquisition from the experiential, practice-driven nature of
social skill development [41]. Several works have begun to lever-
age LLM for social conversational practice [15, 21] and to develop
frameworks for specific competencies like conflict resolution [34]
and empathy [37]. Despite these advances, existing approaches
typically target individual coaching stages or specific social skills
and do not fully meet the practical requirements. Consequently, a
significant gap persists in the absence of a unified social skill devel-
opment framework that can support comprehensive social skills,
adaptive scenario practice, and pedagogically grounded tutoring.
This highlights a clear need for a holistic framework that enables
scalable, personalized training experiences.
To build such a framework, three fundamental data science chal-
lenges must be addressed [20]: (a) Scalable Knowledge Discovery and
Structuring. To ensure pedagogical rigor, a trustworthy knowledge
base must be grounded in verifiable, expert-endorsed principles.
However, while LLM-generated content risks unverifiability and
hallucination, expert knowledge in social coaching is predomi-
nantly unstructured and tacit, often residing in practitioner experi-
ence or scattered sources. Thus, a core challenge lies in automati-
cally extracting, codifying, and structuring validated expertise from
authoritative sources at scale. (b) Personalized Practice Curricula
Scheduling. Real-world learners differ in their backgrounds, goals,
target skills, and prior practice. Static curricula cannot account
for these differences, while unconstrained generation may request
scenarios that do not exist in the available corpus. The scheduling
problem is therefore both personalized and retrieval-constrained:
each prescription must fit the learner while remaining realizable
as a traceable practice scenario. (c) Diagnostic Coaching Scaffolding
Development. Effective tutoring aims to promote learner autonomy
in real-world social skill application. This requires accurately as-
sessing the knowledge deficits in practices and scaffolding to bridge
the "knowing–doing" gap. Besides, beyond prescriptive feedback
alone, the system must enable guided reflection by linking practice
to theory and diagnosing skill gaps. Delivering such diagnostic,
reflective guidance remains an underexplored challenge.
To bridge these critical gaps, we introduce SocialCoach, an agen-
tic tutoring and practice system for personalized social skill learning.
First, to ensure educational validity at scale, we develop a structured
framework for organizing social skill knowledge, grounded in a
theory-to-practice paradigm and enriched through multi-faceted
semantic associations. An automated pipeline transforms unstruc-
tured expert books into a coherent corpus of strategic theories, illus-
trative cases, and practical scenarios. This corpus provides a trace-
able practice space for both personalized scheduling and knowledge-
grounded tutoring. Second, at the core of personalization, we for-
mulate next-practice selection as a cold-start, retrieval-constrained
scheduling problem. We develop a prescription–retrieval–adaptation
policy that conditions on the learner’s profile, simulated proficiency
state, observed practice history, and available corpus. An expected
proficiency estimator generates bounded skill-level transitions for
each selected scenario to simulate state transitions. We optimize the
scheduling policy for complete practice pathways using pairwise
judge-based GRPO training. Finally, to close the practice and tutor-
ing loop, we introduce a pedagogically grounded coaching process
that tightly integrates interactive practice with metacognitive scaf-
folding. After a learner engages in a goal-driven simulated scenario,
the system performs an evidence-linked assessment of observed
behavior and provides tailored, knowledge-grounded guidance.
In experiments, we evaluate corpus quality, pathway quality,
tutoring quality, and perceived usefulness. Automated evaluation
assigns higher quality ratings to SocialCoach than to compared
baselines, which is well-aligned with experts. Furthermore, the user
study reveals a better learning experience with SocialCoach.
We highlight our main contributions as follows.
• We introduce SocialCoach, an agentic tutoring and practice
system for personalized social skill learning, and formulate
its central personalization problem as cold-start, retrieval-
constrained sequential practice scheduling.
• We establish a theory-to-practice social knowledge frame-
work with multi-faceted semantic categorization. The re-
sulting corpus provides a structured practice space for
scheduling and knowledge-grounded tutoring.
• To address cold-start personalization, we propose a retrieval-
constrained learning pathway scheduling algorithm that
formulates practice planning as a prescription–retrieval–
adaptation process. It also leverages the pairwise pathway
GRPO to optimize the prescription policy.
• We instantiate SocialCoach in a deployed platform and
evaluate it through corpus analysis, automated evaluation,
and user study. Results show its effectiveness on corpus
quality, tutoring quality, and user learning experience.
2
Related Work
LLM-powered Tutoring Systems. LLMs are increasingly being
leveraged to enhance Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS), which
serve as conversational partners, moving beyond the static, content-
centric traditional platforms [4, 18]. Prior work has explored spe-
cialized functions within ITS, including learner profiling [43] and
performance assessment [32]. Also, there are some studies on en-
hancing pedagogical strategies of chatbot tutors like Socratic guid-
ance [7, 24]. Furthermore, several multi-agent architectures [30, 39]
have been proposed to orchestrate complementary pedagogical
roles, where specialized agents collaborate on tasks such as content
creation, feedback, and evaluation. Despite these advances, most
LLM-powered tutors remain oriented toward knowledge trans-
mission rather than practice-based development. However, social
skill learning emphasizes iterative practice, contextual sensitivity,

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
Strategic
Theories
Illustrative 
Cases
Practical 
Scenarios
Immersive Simulation-based Practice
Knowledge-Grounded Reflective Tutoring
Extraction
Personal 
Information
Refinement
Filtering
Tagging
Online News
Academic Papers
Sociology Books
Historical
Behaviour
Background
Objectives
Characters
Raw
Content
Filtered
Knowledge
Multi-faced
Tags
Refined
Knowledge
Guidance
Automated Knowledge Discovery
Associated Tags
User Social Profile
Pedagogical Coaching Scaffolding
Estimated
Proficiency 
Status
Data Sources
Automated Knowledge Extraction
Scenario
Goal-driven Simulation
Social Knowledge Corpus
Targeted
Knowledge 
Retrieval
Reflective
Feedback
Generator
Ending
Human
NPC A
NPC B
…
Success
Failure
Social Skill
Social Competency
Scenario Topic
CASEL
Competencies
Behavioral Performance Assessment
Profile &
Dialogue & 
Diagnosis
Theory & Case
Context
Recorded
Conversional
Logs
Performance
Deficit
Attribution
Social 
Behaviour 
Diagnosis
Learner 
Prescription 
Agent
Scenario
Adaptation
Agent
Learner 
Prescription
Personalized 
Scenario
Adaptive Practice Scheduling
Candidate
Retrieval
Module
Scenario
Candidate
Targeted
Skills
Attribution-Based Assessment
Deficit
Attribution
Figure 2: An overview of the SocialCoach Framework for personalized social skill training at scale.
and behavioral transfer. Thus, a critical gap remains in developing
scalable, personalized, and pedagogically grounded LLM-driven
tutoring and practice systems tailored to social skill learning [41].
Intelligent Social Emotional Learning. Social–emotional learn-
ing (SEL) focuses on helping learners cultivate positive attitudes,
self-awareness, and healthy interpersonal relationships [8]. Early
AI-driven efforts in this space emphasized conversational support,
real-time feedback, and scaffolds for socio-emotional growth [33].
With the rise of LLMs, the field has shifted toward adaptive, role-
playing–based systems that can target specific skills with greater
nuance [41]. Recent LLM-based approaches have demonstrated
promise in skills such as conflict resolution [34], empathy coach-
ing [37], and stress self-regulation [10] However, despite these
advances, current systems are typically scoped to narrow skill ar-
eas and face persistent challenges around knowledge traceability
and pedagogical reliability. This fragmentation limits the scalabil-
ity and pedagogical grounding of learning experiences of social
skill learning. It also hinders cross-context skill transfer, creating a
“knowing–doing” gap between understanding and practical use.
Personalization in Educational System. Personalized learning
experience is vital for improving efficiency and engagement as
learners progress [26]. Particularly, designing adaptive learning
pathways can better match individual needs than traditional or rule-
based curricula. To improve path personalization, prior work [5, 13]
trains models for specific scenarios using supervised learning on
well-labeled data. However, such data are often proprietary or
scarce in many educational scenarios. To address this cold-start
problem, recent studies [2, 23] use simulated environments and
reinforcement learning to optimize learning-path policies. These
simulators are typically designed for structured domains such as
mathematics and computer science [2]; social-skill practice instead
requires sequencing open-ended scenarios under learner and corpus
constraints. We therefore use a bounded, scenario-conditioned profi-
ciency transition as a cold-start planning proxy, rather than asking
an LLM learner to generate and then self-assess an entire prac-
tice response. Outside educational scheduling, profile-conditioned
retrieval uses persona descriptions as queries over external cor-
pora [17], personalized query expansion incorporates user-specific
signals before retrieval [47], and history-aware retrieval reformu-
lates queries using relevant prior turns [27]. These mechanisms
motivate our matched retrieval controls, but do not themselves
optimize multi-session practice pathways.
3
Problem Definition
Let S denote the available social skills and K𝑠the corpus of trace-
able practice scenarios. A synthetic learner is represented by profile
information 𝑈, stated goals 𝐺⊆S, an initial proficiency vector
𝑈0
𝑝∈[1, 5] |S|, and an append-only history 𝐻𝑡of realized practice
and retrieval events. The initial scores are part of profile generation
rather than measurements of real users. From K𝑠, 𝑈𝑡
𝑝, and 𝐻𝑡, the
system derives the available practice candidates.
At session 𝑡, the scheduler observes the state 𝑠𝑡= (𝑈,𝐺,𝑈𝑡
𝑝, 𝐻𝑡)
and produces a structured prescription 𝑎𝑡. The retriever realizes this
prescription as a corpus scenario 𝑝𝑡. Given 𝑝𝑡, the tutoring system
guides the learning. The planning environment then updates the
learner state and practice history: 𝑠𝑡+1 = T (𝑠𝑡,𝑎𝑡, 𝑝𝑡). A pathway is
sequential because each selected practice changes the state observed
by subsequent scheduling decisions. We seek a policy that produces
personalized, coherent, and progression-aware pathways under
corpus and horizon constraints in cold-start settings.
4
The SocialCoach Framework
To achieve personalized social skill learning at scale, we introduce
SocialCoach, an agentic tutoring and practice system illustrated
in Figure 2. SocialCoach holistically integrates several critical com-
ponents. Firstly, it automatically constructs a comprehensive and
pedagogically-grounded social skills knowledge corpus from di-
verse, unstructured sources using LLMs. Second, it maintains a user
profile and a factual history of completed practices and retrieval
events. Additionally, SocialCoach employs an adaptive practice
scheduling policy trained with reinforcement learning to prepare
scenario sequences tailored to individual goals. For each practice, it

Tianfu Wang et al.
Social 
Skills
Scenario
Type
Social 
Competency
Strategic
Theory
Illustrative
Case
Practical
Scenario
Figure 3: The proposed theory-to-practice social knowledge
framework with multi-faceted categorization perspectives.
delivers pedagogically grounded coaching through immersive prac-
tice, behavior-grounded assessment, and personalized feedback. We
elaborate on each of these components below.
4.1
Automated Knowledge Discovery
Effective social skill training depends on the availability of high-
quality, context-rich pedagogical content that reflects real-world
interpersonal challenges. However, expert knowledge in this do-
main is often tacit and dispersed across unstructured sources such as
books, articles, and media [9]. Manual curation of such knowledge
is labor-intensive and difficult to scale, while direct LLM-based con-
tent generation risks unverifiability and hallucination [38]. These
methods compromise knowledge scalability or pedagogical relia-
bility. To overcome these challenges, we introduce an end-to-end,
LLM-driven pipeline that automatically constructs a structured
and trustworthy social knowledge corpus K. This method ensures
pedagogical traceability and supports diverse social skills at scale.
4.1.1
Theory-to-Practice Knowledge Organization. Effective
social skills education requires more than isolated facts or generic
tips; it demands a comprehensive framework that connects abstract
principles, concrete examples, and hands-on practice. Most existing
approaches treat these components in isolation, limiting transfer-
ability and depth of learning. We address this gap by designing
a theory-to-practice knowledge framework across three pedagog-
ical levels [36]. This method links what learners should do with
why and how to do it in practice. This integration comprises three
interrelated layers:
• Strategic Theories K𝑡: Provides the conceptual "why" through
abstract principles defining effective social interaction.
• Illustrative Case K𝑐: Bridges theory and practice by showing
the "how" through concrete examples and case studies that
demonstrate social principles in action.
• Practical Scenarios K𝑠: Enables the "doing" by immersing
learners in hands-on simulations for active practice and
assessment, thereby closing the "knowing-doing" gap.
4.1.2
Multi-faceted Semantic Categorization. Social interac-
tions are highly diverse and context-dependent, requiring not only
an understanding of specific skills but also their flexible applica-
tion across various scenarios. Thus, we introduce a multi-faceted
semantic categorization method to structure the knowledge corpus.
This method represents knowledge in a granular yet holistic way,
facilitating flexible indexing and fine-grained retrieval of content
based on each learner’s unique needs. Specifically, each knowledge
item is categorized along the following dimensions:
• Social Competency (C𝑐): Foundational social-emotional abili-
ties based on widely-used CASEL theory [8], encompassing
self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, rela-
tionship skills, and responsible decision-making.
• Social Skills (C𝑠): Actionable, specific skills such as conflict
resolution, empathy, and negotiation. Drawing from the
CASEL framework, we identify 34 essential social skills that
support the five core competencies 1.
• Scenario Context (C𝑡): Contextual categories that are de-
rived from social environments and relationship dynamics,
such as workplace, romantic and public situations [16].
See Appendix A.1 for detailed descriptions of these categories.
4.1.3
LLM-Powered Corpus Construction Pipeline. To scal-
ably extract pedagogical and traceable content of social knowl-
edge, we introduce an automated pipeline leveraging LLM-powered
multi-agent systems for efficient knowledge extraction and anno-
tation [25]. This pipeline yields a structured and pedagogically
grounded knowledge base, with the following principal key stages.
(a) Curated Data Collection. To ensure both pedagogical value and
rigor, we strategically aggregate high-quality, diverse materials on
social skill. These sources include authoritative books, academic pa-
pers, news articles, and other reputable resources, thereby ensuring
coverage of established theories and authentic scenarios.
(b) Schema-Guided Extraction. We first define the schema to rep-
resent three types of social knowledge items (see Appendix A.1 for
detailed schema description). Guided by this schema, an extraction
agent systematically transforms the unstructured collected data
into a set of structured knowledge entities.
(c) Output Validation. Then, we use a filtering agent to verify that
the the extracted content adheres to the schema’s format guidelines
and the completeness across all required fields.
(d) Multi-faceted Tagging. To structure the knowledge semanti-
cally, a tagging agent annotates each knowledge item with multi-
faceted categories, enabling nuanced organization.
(e) Knowledge Refinement. After tagging, a refinement agent
reviews and revises both the content and metadata of each item to
improve quality and accuracy. This step resolves inconsistencies,
such as incomplete descriptions or incorrect tag assignments.
Through this multi-stage process, we construct a structured
social knowledge corpus K = (K𝑡, K𝑐, K𝑠), where each 𝑘∈K is
associated with semantic labels 𝑐𝑐∈C𝑐, 𝑐𝑠∈C𝑠, and 𝑐𝑡∈C𝑡.
4.2
User Social Profiling
Personalized social skills training requires a record of learner’s goals
and prior practice [31]. We maintain a user record 𝑈𝑡that separates
self-reported information from observed interaction evidence.
• Personal Information 𝑈𝑖. Each user is initially characterized
by optional self-reported background, preferences, and tar-
get social skills 𝑆𝑈⊆𝑆. These attributes tailor scenario
practices and guidance content.
1https://casel.org/fundamentals-of-sel/what-is-the-casel-framework

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
• Practice History 𝐻𝑡. The system records completed sce-
narios, retrieval traces, transcript evidence, reflection re-
sponses, and factual activity logs. These observations pro-
vide context for later scheduling and tutoring.
• Assessment Records 𝐷𝑡. When a learner completes a real
practice, SocialCoach stores evidence-linked strengths, weak-
nesses, and diagnostic notes. These records retain the sup-
porting transcript spans and are not converted into an LLM-
estimated proficiency transition.
After each completed session, the skill proficiency changes Δ𝑡result
in state transitions, 𝑈𝑡+1
𝑝
←(𝑈𝑡
𝑝, Δ𝑡). During the learning journey,
the practice scheduler conditions on the learner information 𝑈𝑖,
stated goals 𝐺, transited state 𝑈𝑡
𝑝, and observed practice history 𝐻𝑡.
The resulting event (𝑎𝑡, 𝑝𝑡, Δ𝑡,𝑈𝑡+1
𝑝
) is appended to 𝐻𝑡+1.
4.3
Adaptive Practice Scheduling via
Trajectory-Level Preference Optimization
The development of social skills is experiential, and effective progress
hinges on presenting each learner with the right practice at the
right time. While static curricula lack enough personalization, LLM-
generated content risks pedagogical value. Inspired by the judgment
of human coaches, we introduce an adaptive practice scheduler and
optimize complete practice pathways using agentic RL [40]. The
scheduler operates over traceable corpus events and an explicitly
simulated proficiency state. We separate the state-transition esti-
mator from the pairwise pathway judge so that the same score is
not used both to create state changes and to independently reward
each session.
4.3.1
Prescription-Retrieval-then-Adaptation. At each ses-
sion 𝑡, we schedule a scenario practice 𝑝𝑡with the following stages.
Practice Prescription. The prescription agent conditions on the
learner’s profile, stated goals, current simulated proficiency, and
observed practice history to produce the next scenario requirement.
This requirement consists of a brief query, core skill constraints,
and optional scenario attributes used as retrieval filters, such as
situational context and relationship type.
Candidate Retrieval. The prescribed requirement serves as a
query and filters to retrieve the most suitable scenario from the
social knowledge corpus 𝐾𝑠. We combine tag-based filtering for
pedagogical alignment with semantic search to rank eligible can-
didates. Optional constraints are relaxed in a fixed order when
necessary; core skill constraints are retained, and an unsatisfied
core constraint returns an explicit failure.
Context Adaptation. Finally, a context adaptation agent personal-
izes the retrieved scenario. Based on the learner’s profile 𝑈𝑡, the
agent selects the most suitable role in the scenario for the learner’s
role-playing practice. This step personalizes the retrieved context
while remaining grounded in the structured and traceable corpus.
See Appendix A.2 for the prescription schema and retrievability.
4.3.2
Cold-Start Pathway Environment. Real longitudinal learn-
ing trajectories are scarce and costly to collect. We therefore build a
cold-start environment from representative learner profiles and the
frozen scenario corpus. It represents cognitive change only through
a bounded expected transition conditioned on the selected practice;
it does not generate learner utterances or treat the transition as
Simulated
Learner State
Profile & Goal
History State
Learner 
Prescription 
Policy
Prescription
Practice Preparation
Candidate Retrieval
Practice Adaptation
Expected
Proficiency
Delta
Estimator
Delta ∆_𝑡
Trajectory-
level GRPO
Generated Pathways
x N
Pairwise Pathway GRPO
Pairwise Pathway
Judge as Reward
Policy Update
Action
State Transition
Environment
Figure 4: Prescription policy optimization with the pathway
preference GRPO for cold-start personalization.
observed human learning. The resulting state trajectory models
short-horizon proficiency transitions within a scheduled sequence.
Representative Learner Profiles. We construct profiles from So-
cioVorse [46] and PersonaHub [11]. We embed demographic and
personality descriptions with Qwen3-Embedding-8B [48], use Max-
imal Marginal Relevance [3] to obtain a diverse subset, and apply
the Hungarian algorithm [22] for one-to-one matching. As in our
original profile construction, each matched profile is assigned 3–
5 target skills and starting proficiency scores 𝑈0
𝑝on a 1–5 scale.
These scores instantiate heterogeneous cold-start states, which are
synthetic assignments to simulate the initial states and goal.
Expected Proficiency Delta Estimator. To simulate the learning
state transition, we employ an expected proficiency delta estimator
LLM𝐸Δ based on an LLM rubric judge to serve as a state transition
proxy. Its rubric is pre-calibrated by experts to refine the criteria and
anchor definitions, which considers profile and goal fit, target-skill
coverage, fit between current proficiency and scenario difficulty,
etc. After retrieval, LLM𝐸Δ receives the learner profile 𝑈, goals
𝐺, current target-skill state 𝑈𝑡
𝑝, practice history 𝐻𝑡and scheduled
scenario practice 𝑝𝑡. It predicts the expected proficiency change
assuming completing the practice,
Δ𝑡= LLM𝐸Δ (𝑈,𝐺,𝑈𝑡
𝑝, 𝐻𝑡, 𝑝𝑡).
(1)
Its output is constrained to a bounded nonnegative interval. Unsup-
ported or weakly associated skills and severe difficulty mismatch
receive zero delta; supported cross-skill changes have a lower cap
than directly practiced skills. Let m(𝑝𝑡) denote the mask of skills
supported by the scenario. The simulated state transition is
𝑈𝑡+1
𝑝
= clip[1,5]

𝑈𝑡
𝑝+ m(𝑝𝑡) ⊙Δ𝑡

,
(2)
Here, ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. Appendix D.3 inde-
pendently validates this proxy on held-out transition cases.
Dynamic Pathway State. At step 𝑡, the environment state is 𝑠𝑡=
(𝑈,𝐺,𝑈𝑡
𝑝, 𝐻𝑡), where𝑈and𝐺are learner information and goals,𝑈𝑡
𝑝
is the simulated proficiency vector, and 𝐻𝑡is the append-only event
history. The scenario corpus K𝑠and pathway horizon 𝑇are fixed;
prior coverage and remaining steps are derived deterministically
from 𝐻𝑡and 𝑡rather than represented as separate policy inputs.
The policy emits 𝑎𝑡, retrieval returns 𝑝𝑡, and the transition appends
(𝑎𝑡, 𝑝𝑡, Δ𝑡,𝑈𝑡+1
𝑝
) to 𝐻𝑡. Thus, expected proficiency and observed
practice history evolve across the pathway.

Tianfu Wang et al.
4.3.3
Pairwise Trajectory Reward and GRPO. In open-ended
social learning, multiple pathways may produce cumulative and
user-dependent outcomes, making statewise scoring and absolute
trajectory rewards difficult to calibrate [45]. Therefore, we propose
a pathway preference GRPO to train it with complete-path pair-
wise feedback, which provides a more reliable and discriminative
optimization signal [44].
For each initial profile, the policy samples a group of complete
pathways {𝜏𝑖}𝑀
𝑖=1. For such an open-ended task, we use a Qwen3-
235B judge 𝐽train that compares pathway pairs using a fixed rubric
for goal alignment, scenario fit, sequence coherence, appropriate
coverage, and expected target-skill progression [19]. Given the same
learner profile and two pathway histories, its output is
𝑦𝑖𝑗= 𝐽train(𝑈,𝐺,𝜏𝑖,𝜏𝑗) ∈{1, 0.5, 0},
(3)
where the values denote win, tie, and loss for 𝜏𝑖. We randomize
presentation order and compute each pathway’s pairwise win rate
𝑤𝑖= 𝑁−1
𝑖
Í
𝑗∈N𝑖𝑦𝑖𝑗over its compared opponents N𝑖, with 𝑁𝑖=
|N𝑖|. We rank the 𝑀pathways by 𝑤𝑖. Let 𝑞𝑖∈[1, 𝑀] denote this
rank from lowest to highest, with average ranks for ties. GRPO [35]
uses the group reward and trajectory-level advantage
𝑅𝑖= 2𝑞𝑖−1
𝑀−1 −1,
𝐴𝑖= 𝑅𝑖−𝜇𝑅
𝜎𝑅+ 𝜖.
(4)
The same 𝐴𝑖is applied to the prescription tokens in 𝜏𝑖; no inter-
mediate session receives a separate reward. Groups with no rank
variation are skipped. We further fine-tune with multi-turn RL.
Signal Separation. The delta estimator only updates the sim-
ulated learning state. The pairwise judge supplies the trajectory
preference used for optimization. Final pathway evaluation uses
an independent pointwise 1–5 judge that scores one generated
pathway at a time, together with a blinded expert subset.
4.4
Pedagogical Coaching Scaffolding
Effective social skill acquisition requires more than passive expo-
sure to content. It demands an iterative loop of guided practice,
diagnostic assessment, and personalized feedback grounded in ped-
agogical principles [1]. To address this, we introduce a three-stage
coaching framework in SocialCoach that integrates immersive prac-
tice, evidence-linked practice assessment, and reflective tutoring.
By linking theory to practice, SocialCoach is designed to support
deeper comprehension and application of the discussed strategies,
helping address the "knowing–doing" gap.
4.4.1
Immersive Scenario-Based Practice. At each learning
session 𝑡, for the scheduled scenario 𝑘𝑡
𝑠, the social skill learning be-
gins with immersive, goal-driven simulations designed to replicate
real-world challenges. These tailored scenarios ensure engagement
by creating a gamified practice environment.
Goal-Driven Scenario Simulation. The practice sessions are struc-
tured as goal-driven interaction games, where learners assume
specific roles within challenging contexts [49]. Each session tasks
the learner with achieving defined social objectives, such as mediat-
ing a conflict or negotiating a compromise, while interacting with
LLM-driven agents representing other participants. These agents
dynamically adapt their behavior and dialogue to the learner’s
actions, ensuring a realistic and responsive simulation. Sessions
conclude upon goal achievement or reaching the interaction limit,
with conversation logs recorded as 𝐿𝑡←simulation(𝑈𝑡,𝑘𝑡
𝑠).
Role-Playing Consistency Enhancement To maintain realism, we
infer contextual features such as power dynamics, emotional tone,
and implicit social norms of virtual agents based on extracted dia-
logues in the corpus. Then, we embed them into prompts to enhance
the response consistency, aligning with their character roles and
the scenario context, and enhancing the interaction immersion.
4.4.2
Practice Assessment. After each practice, SocialCoach
identifies transcript-grounded strengths and weaknesses.
Social Behavior Diagnosis. Using an LLM-powered diagnostic
agent, SocialCoach analyzes conversation logs 𝐿𝑡to identify explicit
strategies (e.g., active listening) and implicit reasoning (e.g., emo-
tional awareness), i.e., 𝐷𝑡
𝑏= LLMdiagnosis(𝑈𝑡, 𝐿𝑡). The agent detects
and categorizes both positive and negative behaviors demonstrated
during the simulation. These behaviors are mapped to CASEL com-
petencies and targeted social skills, which enables precise identifi-
cation of skill gaps and areas of improvement.
Deficit Attribution. Each weakness is classified as an acquisition
deficit (insufficient understanding) or a performance deficit (diffi-
culty applying known skills), i.e., 𝐷𝑡
𝑐= LLMattribution(𝑈𝑡, 𝐿𝑡, 𝐷𝑡
𝑏) [12].
These are tutoring labels, not causal claims.
4.4.3
Knowledge-Grounded Reflective Tutoring. To close the
coaching loop, SocialCoach delivers reflective, actionable feedback
tailored to the learner’s specific needs. This stage aims to support
learners’ understanding and application of the discussed strategies.
Targeted Knowledge Retrieval. Based on the diagnostic assess-
ment, SocialCoach retrieves relevant materials based on both tag-
based filter and semantic embedding from the structured knowledge
corpus, K𝑡= (K𝑡
𝑡, K𝑡
𝑐) ⊂K. For identified performance deficits,
illustrative cases K𝑡
𝑐⊆K𝑐are provided to demonstrate skill appli-
cation in analogous real-world contexts. Additionally, for acquisi-
tion deficits, foundational theories K𝑡
𝑡⊆K𝑡are also retrieved to
strengthen conceptual understanding.
Reflective Guidance Generation. Rather than just static feedback
𝐷𝑡and K𝑡, SocialCoach further adopts Socratic questioning [24] to
foster critical reflection, i.e., 𝐺𝑡= LLMguidance(𝑈𝑡, 𝐿𝑡, 𝐷𝑡
𝑏, 𝐷𝑡
𝑐, K𝑡).
For example, it might ask: "Back to the situation of a case, what
alternative strategies could you have employed to de-escalate the
conflict?" This approach enables a reflective exercise, encouraging
learners to analyze their actions and explore alternative strategies.
5
Experiments
We conduct a comprehensive empirical study of SocialCoach to as-
sess the quality of its knowledge corpus, the judge-rated quality of
its adaptive scenario scheduling, and the perceived value of its peda-
gogically grounded coaching. Generated outputs, prompt templates,
and evaluation materials are available in the public SocialCoach
materials repository.
5.1
System Implementation
5.1.1
Data Collection Method. For the research goal in this
study, we construct the social knowledge corpus by curating books
from recognized lists and category rankings. First, we identify rele-
vant books using category rankings from platforms like Amazon

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
Table 1: Corpus Statistics and Tag Diversity.
Type
Overall Statistics
Norm. Shannon Entropy
Size
Avg. Words
Competence
Skill
Context
Theory
14,186
150.21
0.81
0.74
N/A
Case
23,521
86.92
0.84
0.77
0.79
Scenario
5,463
372.45
0.86
0.89
0.82
Table 2: Mean Expert Likert Ratings on Corpus.
Type
Mean Tag Ratings
Content Pedagogical Value
Competence
Skill
Context
Soundness
Accessibility
Pedagogy
Theory
4.78
4.62
-
4.08
3.81
3.26
Case
4.68
4.55
3.86
4.06
3.98
3.40
Scenario
4.92
4.82
4.63
4.83
4.41
4.44
Books’ self-help section2 (e.g., relationships, emotional intelligence)
and BookAuthority.org3 (e.g., leadership, empathy, social intelli-
gence). Then, we gather the available files of these books from
the Open Library website4. After a manual review for relevance
and quality, we selected 200 books to ensure a focused and com-
prehensive corpus. The final corpus includes many widely cited
works such as “Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life"
and “Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ".
5.1.2
System Implementation Details. We support various LLMs
as agent backends, including GPT-5, Gemini-3-Pro, DeepSeek-R1-
0528 (DSR1), Qwen3-235B, and Qwen3-8B. Concretely, for the cor-
pus construction pipeline, we employ Qwen3-235B as the backend,
Chroma as the vector database, and Qwen3-Embedding-8B [48] as
the embedding model for candidate retrieval. Regarding the rep-
resentative profile used in simulated environments, we visualize
the distribution to show their consistency and diversity. See Ap-
pendix B.2 for details. Next, for the prescription agent, we adopt
Qwen3-8B as the base LLM and optimize it with pathway preference
GRPO [35], implemented using the ROLL framework [40] for multi-
turn agentic reinforcement learning. In a simulated environment,
both the proficiency estimator LLM𝐸Δ and pairwise reward judge
use Qwen3-235B. See more training details in Appendix B.1. Finally,
for coaching scaffolding, this service layer supports multiple LLMs
and uses GPT-5 by default.
5.1.3
Human Expert Panel. All expert-based evaluations use the
same panel of three workplace practitioners, each with 5–8 years of
relevant professional experience in social-skills development and
emotional-intelligence-related practice. For each task, they review
the task-specific rubric and anchors before independently evaluat-
ing the items; model identities, automatic scores, and experimental
conditions are hidden whenever applicable.
5.2
Analysis of Knowledge Corpus
Our automated pipeline produces a corpus of 43,170 structured
knowledge entries, each tagged with multifaceted semantics. To
assess the quality, diversity, and pedagogical value of this corpus,
we conducted the following multi-faceted analysis.
2https://www.amazon.com/amz-books/store
3https://bookauthority.org/categories
4https://openlibrary.org
5.2.1
Overall Corpus Statistics. As shown in Table 1, this cor-
pus is composed of 14,186 theories, 23,521 cases, and 5,463 scenarios.
We analyze the textual depth of each category by calculating the av-
erage word count, revealing that scenarios are considerably longer
than theories and cases. This difference reflects their pedagogical
roles: scenarios provide detailed immersive practice, while theories
and cases offer concise conceptual knowledge and examples.
5.2.2
Tag Diversity & Distribution. To estimate whether the
corpus is well-balanced, we evaluated the diversity of our seman-
tic tags using normalized Shannon entropy, which measures the
uniformity of a distribution on a [0, 1] scale. As shown in Table 1,
the entropy values indicate that the corpus covers a broad range
of social situations rather than being limited to a few contexts. A
detailed breakdown of the tag distributions is as follows:
5.2.3
Expert Likert Ratings. To assess tag quality and pedagogi-
cal value, the expert panel independently rated a stratified random
sample of 150 corpus entries (50 per knowledge type). Items were
presented in randomized order, using predefined 1–5 rating criteria.
The manual validation yielded an average Fleiss’ Kappa of 0.63
across assessments. See Appendix C.2 for details.
5.3
Evaluation on System Quality
We evaluate on 200 profiles held out from policy training. Each pro-
file combines demographic context, personality description, stated
target skills, and a synthetic initial proficiency state. To ensure
a matched comparison, all scheduling methods receive the same
initial states, and all transition-aware configurations use the same
frozen delta estimator. Its cumulative delta is reported only as a
planning diagnostic; the primary final outcomes remain pathway
quality and expert alignment. Following existing studies [14, 39, 42],
we use GPT-5 [28] as an independent pointwise evaluator. It sees
one pathway at a time and assigns anchored 1–5 ratings.
5.3.1
Evaluation on Practice Scheduling. We compare the fol-
lowing baselines: (a) Profile Retrieval [17] directly ranks scenarios
against the serialized profile and goals; (b) P-RAGmodel [47] gener-
ates a fixed pathway from a personalized query; (c) HA-RAG [27]
sequentially schedules practices conditioned each query on per-
sistent practice history. All methods use the same initial profile,
corpus snapshot, prescription schema, retrieval interface, and 10-
session horizon. We instantiate P-RAG and HA-RAG with Qwen3-
8B, Qwen3-235B, DeepSeek-R1-0528, and GPT-5.
Baseline Comparison. Results are shown in Table 3. Across the
four pathway-quality dimensions, SocialCoach outperforms these
baselines, even based on a better backbone model. Paired bootstrap
analysis shows that SocialCoach improves over HA-RAGGPT-5 by
0.47 points on average across the four pathway-quality dimensions
(95% CI [0.40, 0.54], 𝑝< 0.01). With Qwen3-8B as the shared back-
bone, SocialCoach also reduces the first-attempt retrieval failure
rate from 3.5% to 0.0%, indicating better alignment between its
prescriptions and the available corpus.
Ablation Study. We further evaluate three match ablations:
(a) w/o Proficiency Transition fixes 𝑈𝑡
𝑝= 𝑈0
𝑝while retaining the
growing practice history, isolating the contribution of progression-
aware proficiency updates. (b) w/o Pairwise Reward replaces A/B/Tie

Tianfu Wang et al.
Table 3: Evaluation results on practice scheduling. Entries
are mean ± SD across three independent runs.
Method
Goal Fit
Pers.
Ped. Value
Coher.
Profile Retrieval
2.92 ± 0.16
3.04 ± 0.13
2.78 ± 0.14
3.12 ± 0.17
P-RAGQwen3-8B
3.24 ± 0.06
3.15 ± 0.08
3.12 ± 0.16
3.40 ± 0.17
P-RAGQwen3-235B
3.36 ± 0.16
3.46 ± 0.09
3.30 ± 0.05
3.56 ± 0.16
P-RAGDeepSeek-R1-0528
3.45 ± 0.14
3.34 ± 0.16
3.32 ± 0.18
3.58 ± 0.06
P-RAGGPT-5
3.48 ± 0.10
3.40 ± 0.17
3.38 ± 0.05
3.64 ± 0.06
HA-RAGQwen3-8B
3.46 ± 0.17
3.38 ± 0.15
3.34 ± 0.12
3.61 ± 0.07
HA-RAGQwen3-235B
3.60 ± 0.04
3.72 ± 0.17
3.55 ± 0.07
3.82 ± 0.17
HA-RAGDeepSeek-R1-0528
3.74 ± 0.11
3.64 ± 0.07
3.60 ± 0.09
3.86 ± 0.15
HA-RAGGPT-5
3.72 ± 0.05
3.70 ± 0.06
3.66 ± 0.05
3.90 ± 0.09
SocialCoachQwen3-8B
4.22 ± 0.13
4.18 ± 0.14
4.15 ± 0.15
4.32 ± 0.06
w/o GRPO Training
3.72 ± 0.10
3.61 ± 0.16
3.58 ± 0.06
3.75 ± 0.16
w/o Proficiency Transition
4.04 ± 0.12
3.96 ± 0.09
3.92 ± 0.15
4.14 ± 0.07
w/o Pairwise Reward
4.02 ± 0.14
4.06 ± 0.05
3.91 ± 0.06
4.12 ± 0.17
pathway comparisons with independently assigned 1–5 pathway
scores while preserving trajectory-level credit assignment, isolat-
ing the effect of feedback form. (c) w/o GRPO Training retains the
full progression-aware state and frozen 𝐸Δ but uses the untuned
Qwen3-8B policy without judge feedback or policy updates, isolat-
ing the effect of trajectory-level policy optimization. All other com-
ponents and computational budgets are held fixed unless directly
ablated. All three ablations underperform the full model across
the pathway-quality dimensions. Removing GRPO training causes
the largest degradation, while freezing proficiency transitions also
consistently reduces performance. The pointwise-reward variant
performs worse than its pairwise counterpart, supporting the bene-
fit of pairwise feedback beyond trajectory-level credit alone.
Cross-Judge Robustness. We further pre-specify a cross-family
robustness check using Qwen3-235B and DeepSeek-R1-0528 in
Appendix D.2, which shows the evaluation robustness.
5.3.2
Evaluation on Pedagogical Tutoring. To evaluate the
pedagogical feedback, we use GPT-5 [28] to generate synthetic
interaction traces for 200 practice sessions. These traces are evalua-
tion inputs rather than observations of learner behavior or learning
change. We compare SocialCoach against four baselines: (a) Prompt-
ing LLM that provides feedback directly, (b) RAG model that re-
trieves from our corpus, and two ablated variants of our system: (c)
one without assessment workflow, and (d) another without retrieval
module. Safety screening excludes high-risk and crisis-oriented sce-
narios, restricting SocialCoach to low-stakes practice. We evaluate
guidance along eight dimensions: Diagnosis (problem identifica-
tion), Attribution (deficit-classification quality), Traceability (source
faithfulness), Specificity (relevance to user actions), Actionability
(clarity of improvements), Reflectiveness (Socratic questioning),
Encouragement (supportive tone), and Personalization (fit to the
learner profile).
As shown in Figure 5, SocialCoach receives higher scores than the
baselines and ablated models across most metrics. Its higher Diagno-
sis and Attribution ratings support separating behavior identifica-
tion from provisional deficit classification. Additionally, we observe
that both retrieval-based methods, such as SocialCoach and RAG,
achieve high scores in Traceability. This suggests that anchoring
feedback in a verifiable knowledge corpus can improve perceived
reliability. Furthermore, SocialCoach also receives higher scores
on more integrative metrics, such as Actionability and Personal-
ization. This supports the value of combining component design
with educational domain knowledge. Overall, these results suggest
that SocialCoach can deliver personalized, pedagogical guidance
within a comprehensive coaching loop under our synthetic-input
and judge-rated evaluation setting.
5.3.3
Alignment with Human Evaluation. We further conduct
several blinded expert studies to validate the alignment of auto-
mated evaluation results with human judgment. (a) Proficiency-
Transition Estimator. On 100 held-out transition cases, the estimator
shows moderate agreement with expert labels (weighted 𝜅= 0.56).
(b) Pairwise Training Judge. On 100 held-out pathway pairs, the
judge reaches 74% exact A/B/Tie agreement with expert-majority
judgments (𝜅= 0.51). (c) Expert Pathway Preference. On a sepa-
rate set of 100 held-out profiles, experts favor SocialCoachQwen3-8B
over HA-RAGGPT-5, with a tie-adjusted preference rate of 68% (95%
CI [62%, 74%]). (d) Pointwise Evaluator. When scoring the same
anonymous pathway and tutoring outputs, the evaluator correlates
moderately with expert ratings across all four pathway-quality
dimensions (𝜌∈[0.55, 0.64], all 𝑝< 0.01) and six of eight tutor-
ing criteria; Specificity and Encouragement do not reach statistical
significance. Together, these results support the automatic signals
as planning, training, and evaluation proxies, but do not establish
human learning gains. See Appendix D.3 for their details.
5.3.4
Case Study of Learning Journey. In addition to our quan-
titative analysis and LLM-based evaluations, we further provide
case studies in Appendix D.4, which trace a concrete learning jour-
ney to illustrate system behavior and perceived pedagogical value.
5.4
End-to-end User Study
5.4.1
Practical Platform Deployment. We instantiated SocialCoach
in an internally deployed research platform. The platform features
a mobile-first React frontend and a Python backend. SocialCoach
serves as its core engine via algorithmic APIs that power adap-
tive practice scheduling, the LLM-driven simulation arena, and the
coaching loop. We provide its key interfaces in Appendix E.1. The
platform was made available to an internal beta cohort before the
user study, offering a gamified environment for social skill learning.
5.4.2
User Study Analysis. With institutional review board ap-
proval, we conducted a 10-practice study with 50 participants (25
university students, 25 early-career professionals; aged 20–30). Par-
ticipants were instructed to use the platform for at least 10 prac-
tices. At the end of the study period, we administered a post-study
perceived-usefulness questionnaire and conducted semi-structured
interviews. See Appendix E.2 for the results.
Additionally, we also conducted a randomized pilot (𝑛= 10)
over that yielded numerically higher adaptive-group means for en-
gagement, expert-rated pedagogical fit, and immediate and delayed
strategy recall. See Appendix E.3 for details.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced SocialCoach, an LLM-powered agentic
tutoring and practice framework for personalized social skill learn-
ing. We formulate its central personalization problem as cold-start,
retrieval-constrained sequential practice scheduling. Our approach

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
Dia
Att
Tra
Spe
Act
Ref
Enc
Per
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2
4.6
5.0
(a) GPT-5
Dia
Att
Tra
Spe
Act
Ref
Enc
Per
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2
4.6
5.0
(b) Gemini-3-Pro
Dia
Att
Tra
Spe
Act
Ref
Enc
Per
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2
4.6
5.0
(d) DeepSeek-R1-0528
Dia
Att
Tra
Spe
Act
Ref
Enc
Per
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2
4.6
5.0
(c) Qwen3-235B
Methods
Prompting
RAG
SocialCoach
w/o Diagnosis
w/o Retrieval
Dia  Diagnosis
Att  Attribution
Tra  Traceability
Spe  Specificity
Act  Actionability
Ref  Reflectiveness
Enc  Encouragement
Per  Personalization
Figure 5: Evaluation results on tutoring guidance.
couples retrieval-grounded prescriptions, a bounded Expected Pro-
ficiency Delta Estimator that updates the synthetic target-skill state,
and pairwise trajectory-level GRPO over complete pathways. The
full system instantiates this scheduling approach with a theory-to-
practice corpus and a downstream practice and reflective tutoring
loop. Our evaluations demonstrate the quality and diversity of
the constructed corpus and show that SocialCoach outperforms
retrieval-based baselines and matched ablations in pathway sched-
uling and pedagogical tutoring. Blinded expert studies further sup-
port the reliability of its planning, training, and evaluation prox-
ies and favor its generated pathways over the strongest baseline.
Platform deployment and user studies provide early evidence of
engagement, perceived usefulness, and improved learning experi-
ence. Together, these findings position SocialCoach as a practical
and scalable framework for personalized social skill learning.
References
[1] Taylor N Allbright, Julie A Marsh, Kate E Kennedy, Heather J Hough, and Susan
McKibben. 2019.
Social-emotional learning practices: Insights from outlier
schools. Journal of Research in Innovative Teaching & Learning 12, 1 (2019),
35–52.
[2] Jonathan Bassen, Bharathan Balaji, Michael Schaarschmidt, Candace Thille, Jay
Painter, Dawn Zimmaro, Alex Games, Ethan Fast, and John C. Mitchell. 2020.
Reinforcement Learning for the Adaptive Scheduling of Educational Activities.
In CHI.
[3] Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein. 1998. The use of MMR, diversity-based
reranking for reordering documents and producing summaries. In SIGIR.
[4] Zhendong Chu, Shen Wang, Jian Xie, Tinghui Zhu, Yibo Yan, Jinheng Ye, Aoxiao
Zhong, Xuming Hu, Jing Liang, Philip S Yu, et al. 2025. Llm agents for education:
Advances and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11733 (2025).
[5] Jiwon Chun, Yankun Zhao, Hanlin Chen, and Meng Xia. 2025. PlanGlow: Person-
alized Study Planning with an Explainable and Controllable LLM-Driven System.
In L@S.
[6] Susan A Dean. 2017. Soft skills needed for the 21st century workforce. Walden
University.
[7] David Dinucu-Jianu, Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Ido Hakimi, Iryna Gurevych,
and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2025.
From Problem-Solving to Teaching Problem-
Solving: Aligning LLMs with Pedagogy using Reinforcement Learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.15607 (2025).
[8] Joseph A Durlak. 2015. Handbook of social and emotional learning: Research and
practice. Guilford Publications.
[9] Julian G Elliott, Steven E Stemler, Robert J Sternberg, Elena L Grigorenko, and
Newman Hoffman. 2011. The socially skilled teacher and the development of
tacit knowledge. British Educational Research Journal 37, 1 (2011), 83–103.
[10] Anna Fang, Hriday Chhabria, Alekhya Maram, and Haiyi Zhu. 2025. Social
Simulation for Everyday Self-Care: Design Insights from Leveraging VR, AR,
and LLMs for Practicing Stress Relief. In CHI.
[11] Tao Ge, Xin Chan, Xiaoyang Wang, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. 2024.
Scaling synthetic data creation with 1,000,000,000 personas. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.20094 (2024).
[12] Frank M. Gresham. 2015. Disruptive Behavior Disorders: Evidence-Based Practice
for Assessment and Intervention. Guilford Publications.
[13] Hengnian Gu, Zhiyi Duan, Pan Xie, and Dongdai Zhou. 2024. Modeling balanced
explicit and implicit relations with contrastive learning for knowledge concept
recommendation in MOOCs. In WWW.
[14] Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu,
Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, et al. 2024. A survey on
llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 (2024).
[15] Michael Guevarra, Indronil Bhattacharjee, Srijita Das, Christabel Wayllace, Car-
rie Demmans Epp, Matthew E Taylor, and Alan Tay. 2025. An LLM-Guided
Tutoring System for Social Skills Training. In AAAI.
[16] Sarah Susanna Hoppler, Robin Segerer, and Jana Nikitin. 2022. The six com-
ponents of social interactions: Actor, partner, relation, activities, context, and
evaluation. Frontiers in Psychology 12 (2022), 743074.
[17] Qiushi Huang, Shuai Fu, Xubo Liu, Wenwu Wang, Tom Ko, Yu Zhang, and Lil-
ian Tang. 2023. Learning Retrieval Augmentation for Personalized Dialogue
Generation. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2523–2540.
doi:10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.154
[18] Chris Davis Jaldi, Eleni Ilkou, Noah Schroeder, and Cogan Shimizu. 2025. Ed-
ucation in the era of Neurosymbolic AI. Journal of Web Semantics 85 (2025),
100857.
[19] Ruipeng Jia, Yunyi Yang, Yuxin Wu, Yongbo Gai, Siyuan Tao, Mengyu Zhou,
Jianhe Lin, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. 2026. Open Rubric System: Scaling
Reinforcement Learning with Pairwise Adaptive Rubric. arXiv:2602.14069 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.14069
[20] Stephanie M Jones and Emily J Doolittle. 2017. Social and emotional learning:
Introducing the issue. The future of children 27, 1 (2017), 3–11.
[21] Matthew Jörke, Shardul Sapkota, Lyndsea Warkenthien, Niklas Vainio, Paul
Schmiedmayer, Emma Brunskill, and James A. Landay. 2025. GPTCoach: Towards
LLM-Based Physical Activity Coaching. In CHI.
[22] Harold W. Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem.
Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 2, 1-2 (1955), 83–97.
[23] Qingyao Li, Wei Xia, Li’ang Yin, Jiarui Jin, and Yong Yu. 2024. Privileged knowl-
edge state distillation for reinforcement learning-based educational path recom-
mendation. In KDD.
[24] Jiayu Liu, Zhenya Huang, Tong Xiao, Jing Sha, Jinze Wu, Qi Liu, Shijin Wang,
and Enhong Chen. 2024. SocraticLM: Exploring socratic personalized teaching
with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
37 (2024), 85693–85721.
[25] Yujie Luo, Xiangyuan Ru, Kangwei Liu, Lin Yuan, Mengshu Sun, Ningyu Zhang,
Lei Liang, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jun Zhou, Lanning Wei, Da Zheng, Haofen Wang, and
Huajun Chen. 2025. OneKE: A Dockerized Schema-Guided LLM Agent-based
Knowledge Extraction System. In WWW.
[26] Setareh Maghsudi, Andrew Lan, Jie Xu, and Mihaela van Der Schaar. 2021.
Personalized education in the artificial intelligence era: what to expect next.
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 38, 3 (2021), 37–50.
[27] Fengran Mo, Chen Qu, Kelong Mao, Tianyu Zhu, Zhan Su, Kaiyu Huang, and
Jian-Yun Nie. 2024. History-Aware Conversational Dense Retrieval. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024. Association for
Computational Linguistics, 13366–13378. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.792
[28] OpenAI. 2025. GPT-5 System Card. https://cdn.openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.
pdf. Published August 7, 2025.
[29] Sarah M Ovink and Brian D Veazey. 2011. More than “getting us through:” A
case study in cultural capital enrichment of underrepresented minority under-
graduates. Research in higher education 52, 4 (2011), 370–394.
[30] Jiahuan Pei, Fanghua Ye, Xin Sun, Wentao Deng, Koen Hindriks, and Junxiao
Wang. 2025. Conversational Education at Scale: A Multi-LLM Agent Workflow
for Procedural Learning and Pedagogic Quality Assessment. In EMNLP.
[31] Erasmo Purificato, Ludovico Boratto, and Ernesto William De Luca. 2024.
User modeling and user profiling: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.09660 (2024).
[32] Sajratul Y Rubaiat and Hasan M Jamil. 2025. Context-Aware Scientific Knowledge
Extraction on Linked Open Data using Large Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.17580 (2025).

Tianfu Wang et al.
[33] Surbhi Seema Sethi and Kanishk Jain. 2024. AI technologies for social emotional
learning: recent research and future directions. Journal of Research in Innovative
Teaching & Learning 17, 2 (2024), 213–225.
[34] Omar Shaikh, Valentino Emil Chai, Michele Gelfand, Diyi Yang, and Michael S.
Bernstein. 2024. Rehearsal: Simulating Conflict to Teach Conflict Resolution. In
CHI.
[35] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei
Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing
the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300 (2024).
[36] Lee S. Shulman. 1998. Theory, practice, and the education of professionals. The
Elementary School Journal 98, 5 (1998), 511–526.
[37] Ian Steenstra, Farnaz Nouraei, and Timothy W Bickmore. 2025. Scaffolding
Empathy: Training Counselors with Simulated Patients and Utterance-level
Performance Visualizations. In CHI.
[38] Tianlong Wang, Xianfeng Jiao, Yinghao Zhu, Zhongzhi Chen, Yifan He, Xu Chu,
Junyi Gao, Yasha Wang, and Liantao Ma. 2025. Adaptive activation steering:
A tuning-free llm truthfulness improvement method for diverse hallucinations
categories. In WWW.
[39] Tianfu Wang, Yi Zhan, Jianxun Lian, Zhengyu Hu, Nicholas Jing Yuan, Qi Zhang,
Xing Xie, and Hui Xiong. 2025. LLM-powered Multi-agent Framework for Goal-
oriented Learning in Intelligent Tutoring System. In WWW.
[40] Weixun Wang, Shaopan Xiong, Gengru Chen, Wei Gao, Sheng Guo, Yancheng
He, Ju Huang, Jiaheng Liu, Zhendong Li, Xiaoyang Li, et al. 2025. Reinforcement
Learning Optimization for Large-Scale Learning: An Efficient and User-Friendly
Scaling Library. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06122 (2025).
[41] Diyi Yang, Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Michael S Bernstein, and
John Mitchell. 2024. Social skill training with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.04204 (2024).
[42] Haofei Yu, Zhengyang Qi, Yining Zhao, Kolby Nottingham, Keyang Xuan, Bod-
hisattwa Prasad Majumder, Hao Zhu, Paul Pu Liang, and Jiaxuan You. 2025.
Sotopia-RL: Reward Design for Social Intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03905
(2025).
[43] Yi Zhan, Qi Liu, Weibo Gao, Zheng Zhang, Tianfu Wang, Shuanghong Shen,
Junyu Lu, and Zhenya Huang. 2025. CoderAgent: Simulating Student Behavior
for Personalized Programming Learning with Large Language Models. In IJCAI.
[44] Qiang Zhang, Boli Chen, Fanrui Zhang, Ruixue Ding, Shihang Wang, Qiuchen
Wang, Yinfeng Huang, Haonan Zhang, Rongxiang Zhu, Pengyong Wang, Ailin
Ren, Xin Li, Pengjun Xie, Jiawei Liu, Ning Guo, Jingren Zhou, and Zheng-Jun
Zha. 2026. ArenaRL: Scaling RL for Open-Ended Agents via Tournament-based
Relative Ranking. arXiv:2601.06487 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.06487
[45] Rongsheng Zhang, Jiji Tang, Junnan Ren, Zuyi Bao, Weijie Chen, Ruofan
Hu, Zhou Zhao, Tangjie Lv, and Yan Zhang. 2026.
DynSess: Dynamic
Session-Level Evaluation and Optimization Framework for Role-Playing Agents.
arXiv:2605.29256 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.29256
[46] Xinnong Zhang, Jiayu Lin, Xinyi Mou, Shiyue Yang, Xiawei Liu, Libo Sun, Hanjia
Lyu, Yihang Yang, Weihong Qi, Yue Chen, et al. 2025. Socioverse: A world model
for social simulation powered by llm agents and a pool of 10 million real-world
users. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.10157 (2025).
[47] Yingyi Zhang, Pengyue Jia, Derong Xu, Yi Wen, Xianneng Li, Yichao Wang,
Wenlin Zhang, Xiaopeng Li, Weinan Gan, Huifeng Guo, Yong Liu, and Xiangyu
Zhao. 2026. Personalize Before Retrieve: LLM-based Personalized Query Expan-
sion for User-Centric Retrieval. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence 40, 19 (2026), 16406–16414. doi:10.1609/aaai.v40i19.38679
[48] Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong
Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, et al. 2025. Qwen3
Embedding: Advancing Text Embedding and Reranking Through Foundation
Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 (2025).
[49] Xuhui Zhou, Hao Zhu, Leena Mathur, Ruohong Zhang, Haofei Yu, Zhengyang Qi,
Louis-Philippe Morency, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Graham Neubig, et al. 2024.
SOTOPIA: Interactive Evaluation for Social Intelligence in Language Agents. In
ICLR.
A
Details of Framework Design
A.1
Knowledge Categorization Details
To ensure our knowledge corpus is pedagogically sound and eas-
ily retrievable, we structure it using a multifaceted categorization
method. Each piece of knowledge is tagged along three key dimen-
sions: its associated CASEL competency, the specific social skill it
addresses, and the scenario type in which it applies.
A.1.1
Associated Social Competencies. In this work, we adopt
the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
Listing 1: An example of a structured prescription.
1
{
2
"query": "Practice a respectful disagreement during a
project meeting.",
3
"core_constraints": {
4
"target_skills": ["Conflict Resolution"],
5
"contexts": ["Workplace"]
6
},
7
"optional_constraints": {
8
"related_skills": ["Teamwork"],
9
"relationship_types": ["Senior", "Peer"]
10
}
11
}
(CASEL) framework [8], which is recognized as one of the most
popular SEL frameworks by the Explore SEL project5 of Harvard
Graduate School of Education. CASEL provides a widely acknowl-
edged foundation for understanding social-emotional learning and
identifies five core competencies: Self-Awareness, Self-Management,
Social Awareness, Relationship Skills, and Responsible Decision-
Making. These competencies represent the broad, overarching abil-
ities crucial for navigating social interactions effectively.
A.1.2
Associated Social Skills. To bridge the gap between CASEL’s
abstract competencies and practical application, the CASEL office
further categorizes knowledge by associated Social Skills. These
are defined as granular, observable, and teachable behaviors—such
as specific communication techniques or actions—that individuals
can practice to demonstrate proficiency within the broader CASEL
domains. Our system tags content with these fine-grained skills to
enable the precise targeting of learning objectives and assessment
criteria. The relationship between CASEL competencies and their
corresponding social skills is detailed in Table 4.
A.1.3
Scenario Contextual Types. Since the usefulness of a so-
cial skill often depends on its context, we also categorize scenarios
by Scenario Type. This categorization is hierarchical to provide
nuanced classification. First, we assign a high-level category de-
scribing the general environment where the interaction occurs
(e.g., Workplace, Family). Next, we refine this with a more detailed
sub-category (e.g., Office, Parent-child). This hierarchical approach,
detailed in Table 5, helps learners practice skills in contexts directly
relevant to their personal and professional lives.
A.2
Prescription Schema and Retrievability
We provide a formal description of the prescription action schema
and the retrievability mechanism for scenario practices.
A.2.1
Action Schema Components. The action 𝑎𝑡is a structured
scenario requirement with a short retrieval query, core constraints,
and optional preferences. Core constraints define what the selected
practice must satisfy; optional fields refine context or relationship
type when matching scenarios exist. All labels come from the frozen
corpus taxonomy, which keeps retrieval behavior auditable and
limits unconstrained query programs.
A.2.2
Retrievability Guarantee. Strict filtering can produce an empty
candidate set. We therefore distinguish core constraints, such as
5http://exploresel.gse.harvard.edu/compare-domains/

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
Table 4: The list of social skills grouped by their main related
competencies under the CASEL framework.
Competencies
Social Skills
Self-Awareness
Identifying emotions
Social and cultural identity
Recognizing strengths
Growth mindset
Self-efficacy
Examining bias
Sense of purpose
Self-Management
Emotion regulation
Impulse control
Stress management
Self-discipline and motivation
Perseverance
Goal-setting
Organizational skills
Initiative and Agency
Social Awareness
Perspective-taking
Empathy and compassion
Expressing gratitude
Appreciating diversity
Identifying social norms and demands
Sense of belonging
Relationship Skills
Communication
Cultural competence
Building relationships
Teamwork and working cooperatively
Resolving conflicts
Helping/Seeking help
Leadership
Standing up for the rights of others
Responsible
Decision-Making
Demonstrating
curiosity
and
open-
mindedness
Identifying and solving problems
Analyzing situations and consequences
Ethical responsibility
Reflecting on one’s role to promote individ-
ual and collective well-being
the target skill, from optional context preferences. Retrieval first
enforces both sets. If no candidate is found, optional constraints
are relaxed in a fixed order and every change is recorded. Core
constraints are never removed; if they cannot be satisfied, the sys-
tem returns an explicit failure rather than presenting an unrelated
scenario as suitable.
Table 5: 7 scenario contextual categories detailed in 26 types.
Contextual Category
Detailed Contextual Types
Workplace
Office, meetings, job interviews, professional collaboration
Family
Parent-child, siblings, home interactions, Spouse
Friendship
Informal, emotional bonding, casual talk
Romantic
Dating, partner conflicts, affection sharing
Education
Classroom, peer discussion, teacher-student roles
Public/Stranger
Store, transport, unknown people, Park, Courtroom
Party/Social
Events, birthdays, wine parties, social mingling
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
Training
Testing
Figure 6: Representative learner profile distribution.
B
Details on Experimental Setting
B.1
Descriptions of Training Settings
We train the prescription policy for 200 steps with a KL-loss coeffi-
cient of 0.001. For each prescription response, it has a maximum
generation length of 2048 tokens. We configure the parallel envi-
ronment manager with a batch size of 64 and a group size of 8.
We construct 1,000 representative training profiles with 3–5 tar-
get skills and synthetic starting proficiency scores on a 1–5 scale,
and optimize 10-session pathways by sampling eight pathways per
GRPO group. After each retrieval, a rubric-based expected profi-
ciency delta estimator with the frozen Qwen3-235B updates only
the skills supported by the selected scenario, which assumes prac-
tice completion and does not generate a learner response. A frozen
Qwen3-235B model as judge then provides A/B/Tie comparisons
between complete pathways using both traceable scenario evidence
and the resulting state trajectory. These training experiments are
conducted on a cluster of 16 NVIDIA H20 GPUs with a learning
rate of 1.0 × 10−6.
B.2
Visualization on Profile Distribution
We visualize the distribution of representative learner profile em-
beddings using t-SNE, as shown in Figure 6.
C
Analysis on Knowledge Corpus
C.1
Visualization on Corpus Distribution
Social Competency Co-occurrence. The heatmap in Figure 8 reveals
logical correlations between competencies. We observe two distinct

Tianfu Wang et al.
Family
31%
Workplace
27%
Public/Stranger
13%
Friendship
8%
Education
8%
Romantic
8%
Party/Social
5%
Parent-child
44%
home interactions
25%
Spouse
21%
siblings
8%
emotional bonding
2%
Informal
0.0894%
casual talk
0.0447%
professional collaboration
38%
Office
36%
meetings
23%
job interviews
2%
Store
0.2%
Informal
0.1%
Events
0.05%
unknown people
23%
Courtroom
21%
Store
18%
transport
15%
Events
13%
Park
9%
social mingling
0.216%
casual talk
0.216%
Office
0.216%
Informal
0.108%
meetings
0.108%
home interactions
0.108%
Informal
53%
emotional bonding
36%
casual talk
11%
peer discussion
1%
home interactions
0.165%
Classroom
56%
teacher-student roles
30%
peer discussion
12%
meetings
1%
Events
1%
professional collaboration
0.333%
Informal
0.167%
home interactions
0.167%
partner conflicts
65%
Dating
23%
affection sharing
11%
Spouse
1%
emotional bonding
0.358%
social mingling
56%
Events
31%
wine parties
8%
birthdays
3%
casual talk
1%
Informal
0.291%
Figure 7: Distribution of scenario contextual types.
SoA
SM
SA
RS
RDM
SoA
SM
SA
RS
RDM
1.00
0.18
0.15
0.47
0.35
0.18
1.00
0.33
0.17
0.29
0.15
0.33
1.00
0.15
0.23
0.47
0.17
0.15
1.00
0.28
0.35
0.29
0.23
0.28
1.00
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Competency Labels
SoA: Social Awareness
SA: Self-Awareness
RDM: Responsible Decision-Making
SM: Self-Management
RS: Relationship Skills
Figure 8: Co-occurrence heatmap of social competencies
clusters with strong positive correlations (scores > 0.3): one linking
Social Awareness with Relationship Skills, and another connect-
ing Self-Awareness, Self-Management, and Responsible Decision-
Making. This indicates that our corpus effectively captures the
synergistic nature of social skills, where understanding others is
tied to interaction, and personal insight is linked to self-regulation
and thoughtful action.
Social Skill Frequency. Figure 9 displays the frequency of the
most common social skills within our corpus. Foundational abilities
such as communication, empathy and compassion, and Perspective-
taking are the most prevalent.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Frequency Count
Communication
Empathy and compassion
Perspective-taking
Emotion regulation
Building relationships
Self-discipline and motivation
Self-efficacy
Resolving conflicts
Goal-setting
Impulse control
Figure 9: Top 10 social skills by frequency.
Scenario Context Distribution. The distribution of scenario con-
texts, visualized in Figure 7, is broadly balanced across key life
domains. The most prominent categories are Family (31%) and
Workplace (27%), with coverage of other areas like public and edu-
cational settings. This balance suggests the corpus provides con-
textually relevant scenarios for a range of real-world interpersonal
challenges.
C.2
Expert Likert Ratings of Corpus
Tag Ratings. The expert panel rated the provided competence, skill,
and context tags against the corresponding corpus content. Rat-
ings of 1, 3, and 5 denoted incorrect, partially aligned, and directly
aligned tags, respectively. As shown in Table 2, scenarios received
the highest mean tag ratings, while theories and cases received
lower ratings on the dimensions applicable to them. These results
indicate that the sampled tags were generally viewed as aligned
with the content.
Content Pedagogical Value. To assess content quality, the panel
rated each knowledge item for Soundness (credibility and authen-
ticity), Accessibility (clarity for a typical learner), and Pedagogy
(potential usefulness for achieving a meaningful learning outcome).
As shown in Table 2, the results highlight the high pedagogical
quality of the corpus across three dimensions. While scenario rat-
ings consistently achieved the highest, the foundational theory
scores are slightly lower. This indicates room for improvement in
making abstract principles more engaging and instructionally im-
pactful. Overall, experts rated the sampled corpus items as credible,
clear, and potentially useful, with scenarios receiving the strongest
ratings for experiential learning.
D
Evaluation on Scheduling and Tutoring
D.1
Separation of Training and Evaluation
Signals
SocialCoach uses three automatic components with non-overlapping
roles. The frozen 𝐸Δ updates only the synthetic planning state, 𝐽train
provides pairwise pathway preferences for GRPO, and 𝐽eval inde-
pendently rates held-out pathways without contributing to policy

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
updates. Experts separately assess transition and pathway judg-
ments, while tutoring outputs and user-study responses are eval-
uated outside the scheduling-training loop. These signals remain
proxies and do not establish human learning gains.
D.2
Cross-Judge Robustness
The same frozen anonymous pathways are independently scored
by GPT-5, Qwen3-235B, and DeepSeek-R1-0528 using the identical
1–5 rubric and evidence bundle. For each dimension, we compute
pairwise Spearman correlations over pathway-level scores, rather
than over a small set of method means. Kendall’s 𝑊measures how
consistently all three judges rank the same pathways. As shown
in Table 6, the results show judge stablity cross difference models
under the same rubric.
D.3
Alignment with Human Evaluation
Proficiency Delta Calibration. The expert panel first calibrates
the rubric, prompt, and ordered output anchors of 𝐸Δ on a separate
development set. Disagreements are used to refine the criteria and
anchor definitions; the estimator and its anchor-to-delta mapping
are then frozen. For independent validation, the panel labels a
stratified sample of 100 transition cases that are disjoint from both
calibration and policy training. The sample covers different target
skills, initial proficiency levels, direct and cross-skill transitions,
and novel versus repeated practice. Given the estimator inputs but
not its output, each expert assigns an ordered expected-change
label (no, small, or moderate); the estimator’s bounded numeric
output is converted using the frozen anchors. As shown in Table 7,
we report quadratic weighted 𝜅against the median expert label and
ordinal Krippendorff’s 𝛼across the three experts, with bootstrap
95% confidence intervals.
Training-Judge Calibration. We sample 100 pathway pairs
from the frozen candidate groups of held-out profiles. The blinded
expert panel independently selects A, B, or Tie from the learner
goals and anonymous pathway evidence without seeing model iden-
tities, judge outputs, or numeric delta traces. Compared with the
expert-majority label, 𝐽train achieves 74% exact A/B/Tie agreement
and Cohen’s 𝜅= 0.51, indicating moderate alignment with expert
pedagogical preferences.
Expert Pathway Preference. On a separate random sample of
100 held-out profiles, the blinded expert panel directly compares
the complete pathways generated by SocialCoachQwen3-8B and the
strongest baseline, HA-RAGGPT-5. Each pair uses the same learner
profile, initial proficiency state, and corpus snapshot; pathway order
is randomized, and model identities, automatic scores, and numeric
delta traces are hidden. Panel members independently select A, B,
or Tie. We aggregate the judgments by profile using the majority
label and treat cases without a majority as ties. SocialCoach records
62 wins, 18 ties, and 20 losses, corresponding to a tie-adjusted
preference rate of 68% (profile-level bootstrap 95% CI: [62%, 74%]).
Inter-rater agreement on the original expert judgments is 0.61 ac-
cording to nominal Krippendorff’s 𝛼.
Pointwise-Evaluator Calibration. The blinded expert panel
independently scores the same anonymous outputs as the held-out
evaluator. For pathway quality, we use the predefined 1 −5 anchors
Perscription
Practice
Simulation
Guidance
Learner
Persona
A PhD student
Junior AI 
Research Intern
Target Skills
Teamwork
Conflict Resolution
Turn 1
Alex: “Hey, Ben, …”
Ben: “I hear you, ..”
Turn 2
Alex: “I know the …”
Ben: “It's not just ...”
Turn n
Title
The Research Debate
Character
Alex, Ben [learner]
Background
A team plans to dev…
…
…
…
…
Query
Navigating technical 
disagreements with …
Filters
Skills: [resolving conflicts, 
…], OR
Competencies: [self-
management, …], AND
Overall Feedback
Hi Alex, this was a 
very successful
Key Strengths
[…]
Areas for Improvement
[…]
Figure 10: An illustrative learning journey case.
and report rank correlation, weighted agreement, and confidence
intervals. The results are shown in Table 8. The learning-path agree-
ment results show moderate positive correlations across all four
dimensions. The tutoring analysis likewise shows moderate agree-
ment on several criteria; Specificity and Encouragement do not
reach significance. Automatic scores remain proxy measurements
rather than evidence of learning gains.
D.4
Case Study of Learning Journey
We illustrate a case study in Figure 10, featuring a learner whose
persona is a junior AI research intern. This learner, while technically
proficient, struggles with navigating professional disagreements
and seeks to improve Teamwork and Conflict Resolution skills.
Based on this profile, the prescription agent generates a targeted
query for a scenario about "navigating technical disagreements with
peers," using filters to find content tagged with the Relationship
Skills and Responsible Decision-Making competencies. The system
retrieves a highly relevant scenario from the corpus titled "The
Research Debate." In this practice, two researchers must resolve a
conflict over choosing between a high-risk, innovative solution and
a safer, established one under a tight deadline. Then, the adaptation
agent assigns the learner the role of "Alex," the character advocating
for the more ambitious, innovative approach.
In the simulation, the learner (as Alex) moves from defending his
position to resolving the conflict. After validating his colleague’s
concerns about the project timeline, he proposes a concrete com-
promise: a "two-day spike" to test the new solution without risking
the schedule. They reached a consensus.
Upon completion, the system provides a detailed guidance report.
The feedback praises the learner’s effective use of validation and
integrative negotiation to reach a win-win outcome. It also identifies
an area for growth: asking clarifying questions earlier to bypass
the initial defensive exchange. Finally, the report poses reflective
questions to help the learner consider how to establish shared goals.
This process forms a complete learning loop.
E
User Study via Deployed Platform
E.1
Description of Product Interfaces
We instantiated SocialCoach in an internally deployed research
platform, whose key interfaces are presented in Figure 11. After
onboarding for initial profiling, the user journey begins in the prac-
tice arena, where learners are presented with a variety of scenarios
like "Managing Tensions in a Meeting". SocialCoach’s adaptive
module dynamically schedules these scenarios to match the user’s
specific learning needs. Upon selecting a practice, the learner is

Tianfu Wang et al.
Table 6: Cross-judge agreement on pathway-level ratings. Pairwise columns report Spearman’s 𝜌; Kendall’s 𝑊reports three-
judge rank concordance.
Metric
GPT-5–Qwen3-235B 𝜌
GPT-5–DeepSeek-R1-0528 𝜌
Qwen3-235B–DeepSeek-R1-0528 𝜌
Kendall’s 𝑊
Goal Fit
0.72
0.68
0.75
0.71
Personalization
0.65
0.61
0.69
0.64
Pedagogical Value
0.78
0.74
0.80
0.77
Sequence Coherence
0.69
0.66
0.72
0.68
Figure 11: Several interfaces of the internally deployed research platform.
Pedagogical
Alignment
4.66 ± 0.55
Curriculum
Fluidity
4.38 ± 0.82
Situational
Fidelity
4.32 ± 0.73
Agent
Realism
4.40 ± 0.66
Diagnostic
Accuracy
4.46 ± 0.67
Reﬂective
Depth
4.76 ± 0.51
0
20
40
60
80
100
Skill
Transferability
4.56 ± 0.67
0
20
40
60
80
100
Engagement
Retention
4.48 ± 0.75
Strongly Disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly Agree
Adaptive
Scheduling
—————————————————————————————————————————————
Immersive
Practice
—————————————————————————————————————————————
Reﬂective
Tutoring
—————————————————————————————————————————————
Overall
Impact
Figure 12: Self-reported questionnaire results from 50 participants. These outcomes measure perceived experience and intended
application, not observed skill transfer.
Table 7: Independent expert validation of the Expected Profi-
ciency Delta Estimator on 100 held-out transition cases.
Comparison
Agreement
95% CI
𝐸Δ vs. median expert label (weighted 𝜅)
0.56
[0.38, 0.64]
Three experts (Krippendorff’s 𝛼)
0.61
[0.44, 0.70]
briefed on the scenario’s background, the characters involved (e.g.,
"Sam" and "Anna"), and the social objectives they need to achieve.
The learner then enters an immersive simulation, engaging in a
goal-driven conversation with LLM-powered agents who respond
dynamically to their actions. This interactive dialogue serves as
the basis for subsequent evidence-linked practice assessment and
knowledge-grounded reflective tutoring. The gamified design of

SocialCoach: Personalized Social Skill Learning with Agentic Tutoring and Practice
Table 8: Agreement between held-out pointwise evaluation
and human experts.
Category
Metric
Correlation
p-value
Learning Path
Goal fit
0.64
p < 0.01
Personalization
0.58
p < 0.01
Pedagogical value
0.62
p < 0.01
Sequence coherence
0.55
p < 0.01
Tutoring Guidance
Diagnosis
0.48
p < 0.01
Attribution
0.39
p < 0.01
Traceability
0.52
p < 0.01
Specificity
0.21
p > 0.05
Actionability
0.45
p < 0.01
Reflectiveness
0.36
p < 0.05
Encouragement
0.34
p > 0.05
Personalization
0.41
p < 0.01
the platform illustrates how SocialCoach can be instantiated as an
engaging learning experience that integrates adaptive practice with
a complete pedagogical coaching loop.
E.2
Analysis of User Study
Results are shown in Figure 12; we summarize the main patterns
below.
Adaptive and Targeted Scheduling. Participants highly val-
ued the system’s ability to align practice with individual needs.
Pedagogical Alignment was rated at 4.66 ± 0.55, suggesting that
users perceived the system as matching social competencies to
personal growth goals. Curriculum Fluidity followed at 4.38 ± 0.82,
with users noting that the adaptive pathways provided a logical
progression through increasingly complex social challenges. One
participant noted, “The clear guidance made it easier to navigate
addressing complex tasks and achieve goals.”
Immersive Practice and Realism. Participants perceived the
simulation environment as realistic. Agent Realism received a high
rating of 4.40 ± 0.66, highlighting the perceived consistency of the
AI agents’ personas and their natural responses. Situational Fidelity
was rated at 4.32 ± 0.73, indicating that users felt the scenarios
captured pressures similar to real-world social environments. As
one participant stated, “The interactions felt surprisingly real; I felt
the same level of social pressure as I would in a physical workplace
conflict.”
Diagnostic and Reflective Guidance. The reflective tutoring
components achieved the highest marks in the study. Reflective
Depth stood out with a rating of 4.76 ± 0.51, suggesting that users
found Socratic questioning useful for analyzing their strategies.
The self-reported item labeled Diagnostic Accuracy received 4.46 ±
0.67, indicating that participants perceived the diagnostic feedback
as relevant. “The feedback helped me discover the ’why’ behind
my behavior,” a participant observed.
Perceived Usefulness and Application Intent. Participants
reported perceived usefulness and confidence in applying prac-
ticed strategies. The questionnaire item labeled Skill Transferability
received 4.56 ± 0.67, reflecting intended application rather than
observed skill transfer. The item labeled Engagement Retention re-
ceived 4.48 ± 0.75, reflecting continued-use intention rather than
observed behavioral retention. One final interview revealed, “[The
Metric
Adaptive
Static
User engagement (1–5)
4.4 ± 0.5
3.7 ± 0.6
Pedagogical fit (1–5)
4.5 ± 0.9
3.8 ± 0.3
Avg. Strategy recall (immediate, 𝑇1)
2.8 ± 0.8
1.6 ± 0.5
Avg. Strategy recall (delayed, 𝑇2)
2.2 ± 0.7
0.6 ± 0.5
Table 9: Pilot learning experience study results. Values are
descriptive means ± SD across participants.
platform] transformed my understanding of social intelligence into
actionable skills I can use every day.”
E.3
Pilot Learning Experience Study
Design. We conducted a pilot learning experience study with 10
participants. After initial profiling, participants were assigned 1:1 to
the adaptive or static condition using a computer-generated random
permutation, yielding five participants per condition. SocialCoach
generated a participant-specific ten-session practice path for every
learner. The adaptive condition could revise the remaining path af-
ter each session using the learner’s stated goals, updated synthetic
planning state, and newly observed practice history; the static con-
dition followed the initially personalized path without subsequent
revision. Both conditions shared the same interface, scenario pool,
simulator, tutoring and feedback modules, practice count, and time
budget.
Measures. Rather than measuring stable trait change, we focused
on practice pathway quality and immediate learning processes.
After each session, participants rated their engagement with the
scenario (1–5). The same expert panel, blinded to condition, later
rated the pedagogical fit of each scheduled scenario (1–5). At the
end of the study (𝑇1), participants wrote down the specific strategies
they planned to apply next time. One week later (𝑇2), they were
asked to recall those strategies without prompting. Session-level
measures were first aggregated within each participant. Given the
small sample (𝑛= 5 per condition), we report descriptive statistics
only and do not conduct inferential tests.
Interpretation. In this small pilot, the adaptive group showed
numerically higher means across all four outcomes. The between-
group differences were 0.7 points for both engagement and expert-
rated pedagogical fit, 1.2 recalled strategies at 𝑇1, and 1.4 recalled
strategies at 𝑇2. The common direction across participant-rated
engagement, blinded expert fit, and both recall measurements is
consistent with the hypothesis that session-by-session path revision
can maintain alignment with learner goals and practice history; the
relatively larger delayed-recall difference makes retention a useful
target for a larger confirmatory study. With only five participants
per condition and no inferential tests, however, these patterns are
exploratory and do not establish population-level or causal effects.
F
Further Discussion
F.1
Modeling Scope and Limitations
Longer-term proficiency changes, including forgetting, are not ex-
plicitly modeled; when an updated learner profile becomes available,
its proficiency state can initialize a subsequent scheduling episode.

Tianfu Wang et al.
F.2
Safety, Fairness, and Cultural Context
SocialCoach is intended for low-stakes practice and reflection, not
clinical assessment, employment decisions, or other high-stakes
judgments. Numeric initial proficiency and delta transitions are
used only inside the synthetic cold-start environment: starting
scores are not inferred from demographic attributes, and predicted
deltas are not presented as assessments of real users. Maximum
Marginal Relevance (MMR) [3] and one-to-one matching with the
Hungarian algorithm [22] are used to sample diverse profile com-
binations, but these procedures are sampling steps rather than
guarantees of demographic fairness or stereotype avoidance. The
system may still reproduce assumptions present in its source mate-
rial or model outputs. Because the corpus and profile sources are
primarily English-language and culturally situated, we do not claim
cross-cultural validity. SocialCoach currently focuses on text-based,
language-mediated practice and does not observe non-verbal or
embodied cues such as prosody, gaze, gesture, facial expression, or
physiological responses. Accordingly, the reported evidence should
not be interpreted as covering embodied social competence or trans-
fer to face-to-face settings. Scenarios and guidance should therefore
be interpreted as context-conditioned practice prompts, and the cur-
rent expert review should not be read as a comprehensive fairness
or cultural audit.
F.3
Data Provenance and Licensing
The corpus was constructed from 200 books accessed through Open
Library and transformed into structured theories (𝐾𝑡), cases (𝐾𝑐),
and scenarios (𝐾𝑠). We retain source metadata and provenance for
derived items, while the underlying source texts and local download
files are not part of the paper artifact. The complete experiment
corpus is maintained separately from the released illustrative ex-
amples. We do not redistribute the source books or the complete
experimental corpus. We do not make a blanket copyright or fair-
use determination in this paper: source-specific licenses, access
terms, and institutional review govern redistribution. Any artifact
release is therefore limited to code, schemas, manifests, and derived
examples permitted by those terms.
